-11 Strategies of a World-Class Cybersecurity Operations Center
1-1:30 p.m. 7/25/2023

podcast 0: Fundamentals
why new book, carson wrote first. cyber changes fast. 4 yrs ago time for update. at mitre. carson at mitre. free resource. help just getting started in cyber. from diff. disciplines.

meant as a resource. don't need to read in order. based on need. 

sans 551, leaders, 450 tech. analyst.

'23 soc. no single answer. why write the book, first. lack of common understanding across industry. for mainly mitre sponsors for mitre customers, mainly govt. soc definition. shapes and sizes. CSIRT defined. some socs don't do that or all of that. 

denominator, there is a threat. defines need. prevent or respond to bad things happening. names tend to appear in different places. depends on size of org. nosc, soc and noc. soc in US. doing cyber defense.

soc does not mean physical place but group of people. 

soc missions differ. many factors. protecting what? discuss w/leaders. soc is not business mission. align functions of soc w/needs/business mission. write down soc services and functions. breadth vs. depth tradeoff. mission scope. meet in middle and figure out. never done.

how soc fits in w/it. current and desired abilities. definitions help define scope. event, alert, incident. org must agree on terms. sometimes contextual, perspective and objective. book is reference for definitions and facilitating communication.

use function categories to help define resources. first, global forum of incident response and security teams. comprehensive. defines boundaries. who is doing this/that?

12:16-12:48 p.m. 7/26/2023

signs some functinalty should or shouldn't be under soc. no perfect answer to draw that line. routine vuln scans vs. level 10 hair on fire stuff. need to have routine comm. w/other teams, long list of contacts, regardless of where line is drawn.

are 2 pieces informing each other. ex. soc & vuln mgmt. ea. able to do function effectively. active vs. proactive. tasks interferring w/ea. other. 

priority is connective tissue between functions/teams.

many things are not dedicated roles, e.g. metrics. table is top-of-mind. 

soc basics: workflow

funnel of data to cases, data->alerts->cases->incidents. definitions. ppl in funnel communicating and collaborating. turning data into business outcomes.  comaraderie of team responding to threats. 

funnel to place context and triage data & events.

cti, know adversary, goes against mission, what threats ahead of time.  automation, to make funnel faster, early in the process.

little confidence in data.  most events aren't bad.  puzzle solving, piecing data together. soc like sports team w/special of functions & backgrounds.

p. 25, fig. 3. basic soc workflow

ops tempo. act in relevant timescales for customer/constituency. parity w/decision loop of adversary. daily stand-up meetings. how are you working and how cna you make it faster.

how to measure, metric? respond to leadership questions and alerts.

podcast 1: Know what you are protecting and why
start: 2023/08/08 1:30 p.m.

why are there security operations at company? focus on what org does or is trying to do. sets priorities.

break problem in pillars. divide and conquer. situational awareness. def. applies to soc and security apparatus.

ooda loop. observe, orient, decide, act. ops tempo. need to go faster than attackers. otherwise won't be able to get ahead.

understand assets in env. get basic right. avoid flashy advanced work before fundamentals.

5 pillars of situational awareness.
figure 5
soc operating context.
iteratively improve all 5 pillars, evolving situational awareness. never done.

mission, legal/regulatory, tech/data env., users, threat

(users, business/mission, data & technology
regulation policy
threat) = soc operating context

understand regulations to use to drive budget, resourcing and prioritization.

business/mission pillar
locations, vendor relationships, acquisitions
need to contextualize what you're seeing.

be curious. understand what orgs and depts do.

routine partnership w/stakeholders. composite asset inv. directoyr of services and pillars, knowledge base formed by soc.  good analyst understand context of what they're looking at.

motivating people. leaders talking to staff. others, play games to learn mission. new data based on mission. ever changing. mission not one and done.

identify advocates/partners w/soc. exercises w/ppl beyond soc org. aware of what other ppl use.

stop: 2023/08/08 1:58 p.m.

start: 2023/08/15 1:05 p.m.
understanding how bussiness operates in context of cybersecurity actions.

telemetry at application and service layer. need to engage w/other teams to understand context.

legal/regulatory reqs.

data collection, retention & backups, tactical

incident, reporting reqs. vary per industry. move fast, e.g. breach timelines. posture for breach notification, pertain to parts of business.

encryption reqs for privacy. big in europe.

legal can make getting data harder.

cloud reason for 2nd edition. moving fast. makes privacy harder. have additional data souces due to traffice encrption. will continue to move in that direction as soem data becomes unavialable for various reasons.

understanding the tech. env, critical systems & data
services, cloud endpoints forms denominator for completness of what SOC is doing.

composite inventory

competition for being single source of truth. need to draw sources into composite inventory.

good socs 1) gather & translate signals from source and pass to composite inventory owner and 2) leveraging inventory in every thing they do. forms basis of shared situational awareness with every stakeholder.

assigning business function to servers & assets as well as assigning risk & criticality to servers.

start w/tactical things. then build knowledge on top & tie together.  don't do it all at once.

spend as many resource on composite innventory as on siem.  the process of moving data across assets, generating signals, is business specific and complex which need a lot of resources.

understand users -

zero trust archs - buzzword, not including soc in discussion of deployment.

rules looking for unusual behaviour, spam cannon of "was that you". resource drain. be guarded on which about how reacting to users.

use automations to handle higher fp and asking "was that you".

soc wants to know what's normal.  restrain turnover to keep experience.

service-to-service trust can be problematic. understand service arch. mature sdlc. threat models.

identity is being attacked more.

understand threat

know what threats are (leaders too). ongoing dialogue w/stakeholders. characterize incidents over time.  look to own org. to start w/rather than external threats. biuld from exp. look at tactical and operational info from local first.

who among customer would attacker go after.

thinking about insider threat, fraud and abuse. anything "as-a-service".

build awareness over time

not all at once. build momentum and trhythme. expend resources on getting good a services(s) and/or users.  build confidence and demonstrates material outcomes, not a money pit.

automate where you can. don't automatically update a spreadsheet.

prioritize assets. business jewels. focus on iterative improvement.

stop: 2023/08/15

start: 2023/09/22 08:45
podcast 2: give soc authority to do its job
why important? critical to have write down what soc does and how it does it for.
soc aren't efficient when what needs to get written down doesn't match the culture.

build boundaries of what to do. document. hit objectives for creating soc. don't wait for heat of moment.

how to start creating charter? steering committee for soc. soc exists because execs decided. dimensions: provided functions and services, what asset/user doe s soc serve? handle contractors and vendors. concept of operations, scoping document.  What's not protected.

boundaries are always a conversation during charter. cloud is outsourceing of tech.

def. of soc scope is realized in how inventory is divided.

what has to be in charter? example? section 2.1.2 elements of charter.

don't have charter?

charter allows working with other teams. gives authority.  w/o charter where does authority come from. authority vs. responsibility. may do things that aren't responsible for. allowed and enabled to do. e.g. scanning w/o est. scanning program. helps to get digital artifacts.

know what's not in a charter. some soc don't do ir, e.g. key soc functions. aware changes of org and expectations.

2.1.4 policies soc leans on. charters of other orgs for what they're responsibility for.

steering committee affects charter. what does it look like. formed by stake holders. interest of ppl soc serves. major it/ot system owners. office of ciso. regular it operations. other parts of business.

stop: 2023/09/22 09:00

start: 2023/09/23 09:01
podcast 2 con't:
steering committee, executive, high level, not day to day, strategic, not tactical. help to bridge time to interact with teams. crisp value statement & charter.

steering committee comminicatyion, culture depeendent, meet right people, may be more informal.

2.2 org alignment. where to place the soc? culture dependent. may not be ciso. resp. of senior org and their scope. provide support for soc resp. may shift over tim eto discover alignment. create relationship w/ org(s). engage w/sr. mgmt.

tension between syber org and kind of it, at home in both but one or the other. belonging to business unit. tough trade offs. what's gained or given up. deputy ciso. cybersec not just soc. soc monitor new it stuff, tension. ciso talks w/it.

worried, soc drawn away from ppl doing bad things. compliance & news articles, ..., etc.

why is cio ciso more common choice? more natural alignment. soc works with other cyber programs. fit w/programs and tech. laws require cio to be responsible in govt. operational elements -> cio, ciso. under coo? federated socs in business arm of greater enterprise. how to keep business going & integrate soc use cases.

cso, peered with network ops, noc.  merged unmerge noc/soc. gain/lose efficiencies. netflow use. overlap of tasks. skill sets are very different, can't rotate ppl. help desks and tooling can gain efficiences. soc noc may not interact as much as thought.

soc regular engagment, was that you? help understand alert? what systems are you putting into place next quarter? doesn't matter where soc is located. noc all things it, ot, & network ops.

soc in business or mission unit. large bu. or need rep w/bu or mission unit. context is key. helps w/context. org boundaries. tech systems or user bases which can be separated, or different risk models. not for small soc/companies.

autonomic soc, embed ppl. in projects to manage security. distributed security. sections 3 & 10.

where in or chart. drives in & out of charter. clarify assumptions about what soc does. no one recipe, neeed to find mix w/communcation of stake holders/constituency.

stop: 2023/09/23 09:26

start: 2023/09/23 10:43
podcast #3: SOC structure
match org needs. why important? defines how elements fit together. pieces define what soc looks like. structures & best practice, evolution.

most important drivers? how many to form a team? what to hope to be? combined it & sec. team.

different ways to organize? def. terms. some ppl do soc functions w/o soc, ad-hoc. not formal soc. distributed, centralized, federated. ack ppl doing soc elements, dist. may have other resp. traditional: centralized. socs of different orgs/businesses, need to share information. hierarchical, coordinating sub-soc efforts, involved in day-to-day. size of org. big driver.

how has this section evolved? trends? started with centralized soc. ppl doing sec ops need to be in sync. communication. otherwise bad things happen. some can't do it this way. too big, too small, need mssp, ..., etc. context of giant socs, less context. can't pull all info into one place causes missing context. distributed can provide context at soc level.

how small can be? m&a going on, turbulent env. orgs need to understand ubsiness plans. if plan for consolidation, then soc needs to follow. share intelligence across socs. small and employ super users in co. soc deputies/advocates/PoC.

3.3 what are key points?

stop: 2023/09/23 10:58

start: 2023/09/24 09:00
podcast #3: con't SOC structure
some possible functional grouping ides? group core soc functions. cti hunting & analytics, maybe separate team. arch, eng, & admin. running own tools. eng needs to know mission.
other function, training, metrics, exercises, communications. vuln mgmt, dotted line.

what ops tempo? interruptable function? triage & ir, yes, cti hunting and forensics, no. figure 7. no 2 socs structured the same. very rough examples. need to focus and/or need to iterate. SOC fundamentals focus on people trying to do bad things, not on specific tech, AD, PKI, ..., etc.

soc eng. take needs of analyst translate needs of eng. and time constraint of analyst. analyst resp. for improving tools. every soc role needs dedicated time for improvement. agency, empowerment. drives improvement, investment and engagement.  soc needs voice in tools selected.

no time to fully define reqs for eng. to select tools. eng doesn't do analysts job, so don;t know analysts needs. eng org has own needs, not just analysts.

how is work moving thru the system? to tier or not to tier.

tiers, funnel, flow of alerts thru soc. some object to "tier".  tierless models can be successful,  move to model that grow analyst. challenge them. improves efficiency. tierless can encourage growth. tierless, analyst handle cradle to grave, on-call. tier, level 2 are happier as they have less busy work. becareful to lose tier 1 analyst. don't use "tier 1, 2" terms. don;t use language that creates a hierarchy. don't have analyst that just do triage. still have need to do QA and differentiate responsibilities. use automation so avoid fighting the same battles everyday. but automation does not get rid of triage.

some outsource tier 1 and have a couple of tier 2 analyst.  becareful of over tuning alerts. ai/ml can't do detection as well as ppl.

use soft lines when choosing to tier, avoid compartmentalization. infosec should be challenging and provide growth.

section 3.3.4, see workforce section. how to get grind work done.

stop: 2023/09/24 10:00

start: 2023/09/24 11:37
what to outsource? both broad and specific, core functions to malware analysis. MSSP, MDR, IR partner, exercises, rt, pt, cti, ..., etc.
what in-house skills? areas of growth. consider what functions you have and where those functions reside.

make mssp tier 1? mssp misses context. have at least 1 person in IR if oursoucing IR to be abble to call out mssp. use metrics. have hunt team discover what missed. making operations better? use 5 buckets/pillares of situational awareness in 1.  how does mssp affect these?  need to bbe expert at understanding the threat. are they industry aware? may understand threats against business better. consider internal growth when outsourcing. may cutoff growth.

mssp for 24/7 coverage. starts wth budget. not all or nothing. extended shifts or days. weekly on-call. define what's meant by 24/7? may not look at alerts 24/7. work changes in off-hour shifts. consider coverage of other depts, e.g. it. 15 fte's for 24/7.  effective hunting can be done hours/days later. may find more threats this way. 24/7 expensive and may not be needed.

stop; 2023/09/24 11:53

start: 2023/09/25 08:57
podcast #3: con't SOC structure
req. to build soc room, how to build soc? what is motivation? collaboratoin and situational awareness. ppl struggle w/picture to see context. challenging for ppl. to physically move. follow culture. don't need dramatic space. provide tools that work. go back to basics. if virtual, set spaces up, whiteboard collaboration. need to touch physical hardware (fluke?).

hybrid approach w/physical and virtual. patterns change from all remote or all virtual. screen real-estate primary/important.

executives need to be briefed. need to be near execs for these during incident. can depend an exec's culture. changes onboarding, reaching out and communicating w/ppl. need to have non-work communications. have ppl. to turn to and places to engage. time to get together physically. need cadence. drives communication and collaboration. may need to travel to site, if follow the sun coverage strategy. opens lines of communication. in many countries, homes don't have separate place for work. changes assumptions for virtual setup, working conditions, when to talk/meet, ..., etc. use cameras. human-to-human connection/contact is irreplaceable. building bonds creates career longevity, surviving incidences together, working long hours together.

summary: key pieces. mission context to setup soc. know charter, skill set alignment w/charter. understand where you're at. structure org/functions to maximize efficiency and effectiveness.

stop: 2023/09/25 09:12

start: 2023/10/8 10:30 a.m
podcast #4: hire and grow quality staff
why important? how changed from previous book? first edition, section affect favor quality over quantity. skillset who to hire. expanded scope all things staffing, flows from soc org. mgmt worried about getting right people on team.

4.1: entry level, or any role. core traits? job posts wrong on entry level. degree w/ experience.  may have other experience. need critical thinking piece. not about running toolset. think and process data given. repsond to new learning experiences. interest in tech. bar set too high, initially.
don;t look for unicorn. creativity and curiousity w/critical thinking. may not know anwswers but willing to explore. field changes everyday.

how to elicit these in hiring. look for some basics. played w/computer. some cyber knowledge. how they think about the probblem. may do ctf activity at school or elsewhere. work w.local group which may not have it. have lab at home. not waiting for cirriculum.

tips for job hunters. avoid resume mistakes. will ask about what's on resume. soc is like a band or sports team. distinct roles that fit together. how got experience. how eveolved capabilities and those around them. ask open ended tech questions. bgp to dns, system dev., ..., etc.

diversity in thought. looking for different skill sets and perspectives. impact and outcome on resume. be aware resume goes thru automated process, keywords. resume only part of battle. networking. use linkedin. some luck. luck favors the prepared. go to conferences which have job stuff. resume, most relevant stuff. may not be chronological. curate for company. some like chronological and varied stuff. diff views on resumes. no on perfect resumes. keep length down.  mgrs have to review lots of resumes. 1 pg or less for entry level.

foundational skill relevant to soc. certs, exp., diversity of background and trasnferability of skills. understand how netwoerks and cloud work.

shifted from tech. reqs. to less. tech. diversity of thought comes from diversity of knowledge. sometime simplistic beginners mind is needed. don't ignore english & art majors. mil exp. above a certain age, no one started in cyber.

how to get started? used to say ir is best place. shifted to sys admin who know what is normal. security is big. any entry point helps. get in door w/whatever degree. take the job thats out there. much easier after first job.

hiring mgrs & leaders. ic, individual contributor. understand culture. looking for tech. mgr or people mgr. project mgmt? start from ppl aspect if need to do all. excited by other accomplishments. good commjnicator speaking to leadership about soc. some tch. knwl to call bs. what does team need? tech. team needs mgr to run interference. less exp. team needs help in trenches.

soft skills. sound decision making in crisis. mgrs involved in IR. understand business & team. manage conflicting priorities.  handle stress of multi-day incident. empathize w/ppl working for them. non-tech manage SOC? no analyst exp. need adaptability. may lose sound decision making. need sr. ppl that are trustworthy. leaders build based on their weaknesses. "fill out the band.".  ability to reset after getting it wrong.

stop: 2023/10/08 11:06

start: 2023/10/08 13:49
podcast #4: hire and grow quality staff

making new hires successful. some emph. on $$ for formal training an conf. constant earning and ojt is vital and must be a day-to-day activity. diliberate practice to step away and do reserach or podcast to refresh. non-tech. training important, communication, plannning, ..., etc. learn new area. how to engage ppl. think about whl person. everyone learn differently. not one kind of training. pair senior w/less exp. ppl. also helps seniors learn to train and gain deeper knowledge. not all senior enjoy this, bowever. document: sop, add data sources, code repo, etc.

non-tech resource: crucial conversations (mitre). trusted advisor. mentorship, how to implement? formal? best are informal. organic. may not call it mentorship, just one person asking more questions than the other. relationships not just in soc, w/ key customers, red team, for example. mentors my not be in company/employer.

red tean should be sharing their technique. rt and threat hunter contacts. rotate job duties to avoid burn-out.

common reasons for leaving SOC. doing things the same as a year ago. use automation. avoid monotonous tasks. boring. no growth. provlde env. that allows people to move around. ppl thrive on solving puzzle and resolving crisis. ppl end up rage quitting because they don't feel like it's getting better. no forward progress of env.

no budget to pay as much as want. how to overcome? env. can go along way. flexible work location/remote work. flexible hours. learning capacity. create culture of doing best you can and supported by mgmt. can't find magical unicorn w/low pay.

handling counter offers. mgr, learn to let go. create pipeline of talnet but presume they will leave. who are my up and comers and plan to replace them. ben folds, alway someone cooler than you. always someone who will pay more. have relationship to discuss careers. create environment where they can talk about an offer before they accept it. may need ot make deliberate trade offs when making counter offer. they maybe looking for something other than $: location, personal project.

be aware of those that work too many hours. help them modulate that and be aware of each other. awareness of how to regulate that. to maintain objectivity.

preplanning for staff turnover. look for single points of failure or knowledge. learn what others know about env. and tools they've deveoped. staff rotations ans SOPs. documentation emphasis. who normallhy leads stuff (incident, e.g.). keep intelligence profile, short. make it a constant thing. prioritize reading and writig documentation.

how to inspire documentatoin. do little bit at a time. put in few places as possible. use cases, detection, IR, ..., etc. be flexible on consistency (e.g. labeling). use search and be less concerned w/tagging. put in place where all can access if someone leaves to avoid void. make it easy to update and consolidate. diff levels of approval. SOP levels. use informal ways of communicating.

how many analyst needed? 24/7, what iw risk nodel? mssp? alert metrics and processing of alerts & queues.  watch for backlog. improve processes & automate before hiring for man-hours. handling basics? too large/bloated? soc should be constantly improving in effectiveness and efficiency. ratios of sensors/alert:people don't really work. metrics may be a place to start. affected by mission scope, regulation compliance. constantly changing. my evolve SOC to occupy slack in bandwidth. manage core and supplemental functions.  typically can't have enough people given all functions. activity should be improving fundamentals of protecting, detecting, monitoring and responding.

stop: 2023/10/08 14:30